Add Core Metadata specification (#530)
CesiumGS/3d-tiles: specification/Metadata/README.md

* [`3DTILES_metadata`](../../extensions/3DTILES_metadata/) - 3D Tiles extension that assigns metadata to various components of 3D Tiles
* [`EXT_mesh_features`](https://github.com/CesiumGS/glTF/tree/3d-tiles-next/extensions/2.0/Vendor/EXT_mesh_features) - glTF extension that assigns metadata to features in a model on a per-vertex, per-texel, or per-instance basis

The specification does not enumerate or define the semantic meanings of metadata, and assumes that separate specifications will define semantics for their particular application or domain. One example is the [Cesium Metadata Semantic Reference](./Semantics/) which defines built-in semantics for 3D Tiles and glTF. Identifiers for externally-defined semantics can be stored within the Cesium 3D Metadata Specification.

## Concepts

This specification defines metadata schemas and methods for encoding metadata.

> **Schemas** contain a set of **classes** and **enums**. A class represents a category of similar entities, defined as a set of **properties**. Each property describes values of a particular type. An enum defines a set of named values representing a single value type, and may be referenced by class properties. Schema definitions do not describe how entities or properties are stored, and may be represented in a file format in various ways. Schemas can be reused across multiple assets or even file formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Schemas** contain a set of **classes** and **enums**. A class represents a category of similar entities, and is defined as a set of **properties**. Each property describes values of a particular type. An enum defines a set of named values representing a single value type, and may be referenced by class properties. Schema definitions do not describe how entities or properties are stored, and may be represented in a file format in various ways. Schemas can be reused across multiple assets or even file formats.
```

>  **Implementation note:** Entities may be defined at various levels of abstraction. Within a large dataset, individual vertices or texels may represent entities with granular metadata properties. Vertices and texels may be organized into higher-order groups (such as meshes, scene graphs, or tilesets) having their own associated properties.

**Metadata**, as used throughout this specification, refers to any association of 3D content with entities and properties, such that entities represent meaningful units within an overall structure. Other common definitions of metadata, particularly in relation to filesystems or networking as opposed to 3D content, remain outside the scope of the document.

Property values are stored with flexible representations to allow compact transmission and efficient lookups. This specification defines two possible [storage formats](#storage-formats).

## Schemas

### Overview

> A schema defines the organization and types of metadata used in 3D content, represented as a set of classes and enums. Class definitions are referenced by entities whose metadata conforms to the class definition, providing a consistent and machine-readable structure for all entities in a dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A schema defines the organization and types of metadata used in 3D content, represented as a set of classes and enums. Class definitions are referenced by entities whose metadata conforms to the class definition. This provides a consistent and machine-readable structure for all entities in a dataset.
```

### Properties

#### Overview

Properties describe the type and structure of values that may be associated with entities of a class. Entities may omit values for a property, unless the property is required. Entities must not contain values other than those defined by the properties of their class.

> **Example:** The following example shows the basics of how classes describe the types of metadata. A `building` class describes the heights of various buildings in a dataset. Likewise, the `tree` class describes trees that have a height, species, and leaf color.
>
> **building**
>
> | property | componentType | required | noData |
> |:---------|:--------------|:---------|:-------|
> | height   | "FLOAT32"     | ✓        |        |
>
> **tree**
>
> | property  | componentType | required | noData    |
> |:----------|:--------------|:---------|:----------|
> | height    | "FLOAT32"     | ✓        |           |
> | species   | "STRING"      |          | "Unknown" |
> | leafColor | "STRING"      | ✓        |           |

#### ID

> IDs (`id`) uniquely identify a property within a class, and must contain only alphanumeric characters and underscores. IDs should be human-readable (wherever possible) and camel-case. When IDs subject to these restrictions are not sufficiently clear for human readers, applications should also provide a property *name*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IDs (`id`) uniquely identify a property within a class, and must contain only alphanumeric characters and underscores to be machine-parseable. IDs should be camel case strings that are human-readable (wherever possible). When IDs subject to these restrictions are not sufficiently clear for human readers, applications should also provide a property *name*.
```

Author: I'm not sure what "machine-parseable" means here, or why non-alphanumeric characters aren't. We probably don't want to get into "should be valid variable names in [language]" here, would it be OK to include just the 2nd change?

Reviewer: that's fair, just do the second change

#### Name

Names (`name`) provide a human-readable label for a property, and must be unique to a property within a class. Names must be valid UTF-8 strings, and should be written in natural language. Property names do not have inherent meaning; to provide such a meaning, a property must also define a [semantic](#semantic).

> **Example:** A typical ID / Name pair, in English, would be `localTemperature` and `"Local Temperature"`. In Japanese, the name might be represented as "きおん". Because IDs are restricted to alphanumeric characters and underscores, use of helpful property names is essential for clarity in many languages.

#### Description

Descriptions (`description`) provide a human-readable explanation of a property, its purpose, or its contents. Typically at least a phrase, and possibly several sentences or paragraphs. To provide a machine-readable semantic meaning, a property must also define a [semantic](#semantic).

#### Semantic

> Property IDs, names, and descriptions do not impute meaning. To provide such a meaning, properties may be assigned a semantic identifier string (`semantic`), indicating how the property's content should be interpreted. Semantic identifiers may be defined by the [Cesium Metadata Semantic Reference](./Semantics/) or by external semantic references, and may be application-specific. Identifiers should be uppercase, with underscores as word separators.

Reviewer: TIL impute is a word... let's pick a more common wording that's consistent with other sections.

```suggestion
Property IDs, names, and descriptions do not have an inherent meaning. To provide a machine-readable meaning, properties may be assigned a semantic identifier string (`semantic`), indicating how the property's content should be interpreted. Semantic identifiers may be defined by the [Cesium Metadata Semantic Reference](./Semantics/) or by external semantic references, and may be application-specific. Identifiers should be uppercase, with underscores as word separators.
```

| UINT16  | Unsigned integer in the range `[0, 65535]`                                |
| INT32   | Signed integer in the range `[-2147483648, 2147483647]`                   |
| UINT32  | Unsigned integer in the range `[0, 4294967295]`                           |
| INT64   | Signed integer in the range `[-9223372036854775808, 9223372036854775807]` |
| UINT64  | Unsigned integer in the range `[0, 18446744073709551615]`                 |
| FLOAT32 | A number that can be represented as a 32-bit IEEE floating point number   |
| FLOAT64 | A number that can be represented as a 64-bit IEEE floating point number   |
| BOOLEAN | True or false                                                             |
| STRING  | A sequence of characters                                                  |
| ENUM    | An enumerated type                                                        |

Floating-point properties (`FLOAT32` and `FLOAT64`) must not include values `NaN`, `+Infinity`, or `-Infinity`.

[Enum properties](#enums) are denoted by `ENUM`. An enum property must additionally provide the ID of the specific enum it uses, referred to as its enum type (`enumType`).

> > **Implementation Note:** Developers of authoring tools should be aware that many JSON implementations support only numeric values that can be represented as IEEE-754 double precision floating point numbers. Floating point numbers should be representable as double precision IEEE-754 floats when encoded in JSON. When those numbers represent property values (such as `noData`, `min`, or `max`) having lower precision (e.g. single-precision float or 8-bit or 16-bit integer), the values should be rounded to the same precision in JSON to avoid any potential boundary mismatches. Numeric property values encoded in binary storage are unaffected by these limitations of JSON implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Implementation Note:** Developers of authoring tools should be aware that many JSON implementations support only numeric values that can be represented as IEEE-754 double precision floating point numbers. Floating point numbers should be representable as double precision IEEE-754 floats when encoded in JSON. When those numbers represent property values (such as `noData`, `min`, or `max`) having lower precision (e.g. single-precision float, 8-bit integer or 16-bit integer), the values should be rounded to the same precision in JSON to avoid any potential boundary mismatches. Numeric property values encoded in binary storage are unaffected by these limitations of JSON implementations.
```

Reviewer: also i'm not sure what "boundary mismatches" mean here, I would reword this to be more specific.

Author: OK – I've edited your suggestion to remove the word "boundary", I think just "mismatches" is likely clear enough here.

Context: The phrase "bounding mismatch" is taken [from the glTF specification](https://www.khronos.org/registry/glTF/specs/2.0/glTF-2.0.html#accessors-bounds), albeit in a section on min/max bounds where the term "boundary" is defined by context.

#### Normalized Values

Normalized properties (`normalized`) provide a compact alternative to larger floating-point types. Normalized values are stored as integers, but when accessed are transformed to floating-point form according to the following rules:

* Unsigned integer values (`UINT8`, `UINT16`, `UINT32`, `UINT64`) must be rescaled to the range `[0.0, 1.0]` (inclusive)
* Signed integer values (`INT8`, `INT16`, `INT32`, `INT64`) must be rescaled to the range `[-1.0, 1.0]` (inclusive)

> > **Implementation Note:** Depending on the implementation and the chosen integer type, there may be some loss of precision in values after denormalization. For example, if the implementation uses 32-bit floating point variables to represent the value of a normalized 32-bit integer, there are only 23 bits in the mantissa of the float, and lower bits will be truncated by denormalization. Client implementations should use higher precision floats when appropriate for correctly representing the result.

Reviewer: Not 100% if it's "unnormalize" or "denormalize", but we've been using "unnormalize" in our impelementation. 

```suggestion
> **Implementation Note:** Depending on the implementation and the chosen integer type, there may be some loss of precision in values after unnormalizing. For example, if the implementation uses 32-bit floating point variables to represent the value of a normalized 32-bit integer, there are only 23 bits in the mantissa of the float, and lower bits will be truncated after unnormalizing. Client implementations should use higher precision floats when appropriate for correctly representing the result.
```

Author: I think I disagree with this change – the two words have different meanings and this is the correct one for the context:

- unnormalized: value has not been normalized.
- denormalized: value has been decoded from a normalized form.

Wikipedia makes similar distinctions between [denormalized](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denormalization) and [unnormalized](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unnormalized_form) forms, referring to relational tables and not GPU attributes though.

Reviewer: okay, leave it as-is.

| variable     | `number[]`, `boolean[]`, `enum[]` | array index | `arrayOffset[id] + i`                   |
| fixed        | `number[]`, `boolean[]`, `enum[]` | array index | `id * componentCount + i`               |
| variable     | `string[]`                        | byte offset | `stringOffset[arrayOffset[id] + i]`     |
| fixed        | `string[]`                        | byte offset | `stringOffset[id * componentCount + i]` |

`VECN` and `MATN` types are treated as fixed-length numeric arrays.

Each expression in the table above defines an index into the underlying property array. For a property array of `FLOAT32` components, index `3` would correspond to <u>_byte_</u> offset `3 * sizeof(FLOAT32) = 12` within that array. For an array of `BOOLEAN` components, offset `3` would correspond to <u>_bit_</u> offset `3`.

> **Example:** Five variable-length arrays of UINT8 components, binary-encoded in a buffer. The associated property definition would be `type = "ARRAY"`, and `componentType = "UINT8"`, `componentCount = undefined` (variable-length).
>
> <img src="figures/array-of-ints.png"  alt="Variable-length array" width="640px">

> > **Example:** Two variable-length arrays of strings, binary-encoded in a buffer. The associated property definition would be `type = "ARRAY"`, `componentType = "STRING"`, `componentCount = undefined` (variable-length).

Reviewer: Noticed one thing to clarify in this example:

```suggestion
> **Example:** Two variable-length arrays of strings, binary-encoded in a buffer. The associated property definition would be `type = "ARRAY"`, `componentType = "STRING"`, `componentCount = undefined` (variable-length). Observe that the last element of the array offset buffer points to the last element of the string offset buffer. This is because the last valid string offset is the next-to-last element of the string offset buffer.
```

Author: Ah good clarification! 👍
